# DynBiodivMon
Data, code and figures for the paper "Monitoring ecosystem function through species interaction networks" submited to the special Issue "Network ecology in the Anthropocene" in Journal of Applied Ecology.


Abstract:
Ecosystem integrity is an important concept for biodiversity monitoring frameworks, as it encompasses compositional, structural and functional facets of biodiversity. The integrity of ecosystems is intrinsically linked to species interactions, which are continuously reorganized under the pervasive changes of the Anthropocene. We illustrate that biodiversity monitoring frameworks could benefit from integrating interaction network approaches to more directly capture the changes in the ecological functions they generate, further serving as early signals of changes in the ecosystem to halt biodiversity loss and promote ecosystem integrity. We synthesize evidence from major monitoring frameworks and show that they mainly focus on compositional and structural metrics, while functional metrics are underrepresented and predominantly productivity related. Measurements of species interactions are rarely considered nor included. As a result,  ecosystem function is only partly captured, potentially masking ongoing loss and reconfiguration of ecological networks. 
Recent advances in field methodologies have recently greatly improved the opportunities to monitor interactions across systems and scales. In parallel, the increasing development of meta-networks across interaction types at different spatial scales offers a promising pathway to upscale interaction data through observational, modelling inference, or mixed approaches allowing accomplishing demands from local to global scales although challenges are still to be solved.
We argue that incorporating species interaction networks into biodiversity monitoring contributes to operationalizing assessment of changes in ecosystem integrity, particularly under rapid, human driven environmental change. This addition could enable earlier detection of ecosystem change, as interaction losses might precede compositional change, making ecosystem change difficult to anticipate using species inventories alone. This ultimately improves assessment of ecological change, and strengthens the scientific basis for conservation and restoration.
